Diary Day 1.


discussion on syllabus and expectations

introduce Fatima, then 

introduction on topics like guerrieri

business cycles, long run economic growth, 


•	Ask students how they think macroeconomics will be different from microeconomics. Make a list of anything interesting that they come up with. Ask students why studying macroeconomics might be important for all students regardless of their major. One reason is to be a more informed voter.

•	Ask students what are some interesting questions about microeconomics
Microeconomic versus Macroeconomic Questions
Microeconomic Questions	Macroeconomic Questions
Should I go to business school or take a job right now?	How many people are employed in the economy as a whole this year?
What determines the salary Google offers to Cherie Camajo, a new Columbia MBA?	What determines the overall salary levels paid to workers in a given year?
What determines the cost to a university or college of offering a new course?	What determines the overall level of prices in the economy as a whole?
What government policies should be adopted to make it easier for low-income students to attend college?	What government policies should be adopted to promote employment and growth in the economy as a whole?
What determines whether Citibank opens a new office in Shanghai?	What determines the overall trade in goods, services, and financial assets between the United States and the rest of the world?
Why was there a shortage of toilet paper during the coronavirus pandemic?	How did a fall in consumer spending during the pandemic affect overall employment?

•	Conduct a brief poll of your students to identify how they think the economy is doing. Have them each identify (by a show of hands, a voice vote, or on a slip of paper) whether they think the state of the economy is “excellent,” “good,” “fair,” or “poor.” Present the results of the poll to the class. 


Then ask your students to tell you on what they based their decision. What made them choose excellent, good, fair, or poor? They may say something about GDP, inflation, or unemployment. Keep a list of their responses. Ask them how their responses would have been different a year ago and five years ago. Use their sense of how things are going and how the state of the economy can change over time to lead into a discussion of the business cycle. 
•	Ask students to recall the actions that the government took during the recession of 2020. What were the short-term benefits of the government relief packages? (Alleviating the pains of unemployment and saving small businesses.) What are the long-term costs? (The increase in the public debt, the danger of high inflation in the future.) 


and stop with a notice

show how complicated recession is by showing job openings data

. It is a good time to mention the deficit and debt levels and see what students think about them. Tell students that policy makers evaluate the economy by comparing the current data with average or benchmark values to get a sense for where we are. Mention that a downside of recession is higher-than-average unemployment. 


Opening Example: In 2016, the unemployment rate in Greece was 24% and was much higher for people younger than 25 years. This extremely high unemployment rate is highlighted as a consequence of the Great Recession. The Great Recession is compared with the Great Depression (1929–1940) to show how economic policies might help or hinder recovery. 

then talk about simple models + course questions we will answer

Arrange the following questions!

Handout 6(21)-1: ANSWER SHEET
Possible answers may include: 
Microeconomic Questions	Macroeconomic Questions
Example:
What factors affect hiring decisions of a typical firm? 	
What factors affect the unemployment rate?
Why would a typical consumer buy fewer goods than before? If the demand for a certain good or service falls, how does it affect the output of a typical firm?	How does a fall in consumer spending affect the country’s output? 
If the price of a certain good or service rises, how would it affect buying decisions of a typical consumer? If the price of a certain good or service rises, how would it affect production decisions of a typical firm? 	How does inflation affect the economy?
If the government imposes the tax on sales of a certain good or service, how would the market prices and quantities of that good or service change? If the government taxes the consumer’s income, how would it affect buying decisions of a typical consumer? 	If the government raises taxes, how would it affect the economy?


	Output	Inflation	Unemployment
Recession 	Decreases	Decreases	Increases
Expansion	Increases	Increases	Decreases


Examples of monetary and fiscal policy:

•	In response to the Great Recession of 2008, the U.S. government cut taxes and increased spending. The government actions were helping the depressed economy.
•	In response to the Great Recession of 2008, many European governments raised taxes and cut spending. The government actions were hurting the economy.
•	When a recession hit Brazil in 2014, the government cut spending. The government actions were hurting the economy.
•	When the coronavirus recession hit the United States in 2020, the U.S. government launched the $2 trillion relief package in March and the $3 trillion package in May. The government actions were helping the depressed economy.


Web Resources 
The following websites provide information on U.S. GDP, inflation, unemployment, and many other interesting macroeconomic variables:
https://www.stlouisfed.org/
https://www.bea.gov/
 


For Inquiring Minds 
Defining Recessions and Expansions—This FIM explains how recessions are defined (and that there is no exact definition!). 



. The Business Cycle 
A.	Charting the business cycle 
1.	Over time, major economic indicators increase, but it’s not a steady upward trend: In the early 1990s, the early 2000s, 2007, and 2020, both employment and industrial output stumbled. The uneven pace of the economy’s progress is one of the main preoccupations of macroeconomics. 
2.	The business cycle is made up of recessions (also called contractions), which are periods of economic downturn when output and employment are falling, and expansions (also called recoveries), which are periods of economic upturn when output and employment are rising. 
3.	The business-cycle peak is the point in time at which the economy shifts from expansion to recession. 
4.	The business-cycle trough is the point in time at which the economy shifts from recession to expansion. 
B.	The pain of recession 
1.	The pain of recession is felt by workers who are unable to find or hold jobs.
2.	Because recessions cause many people to lose their jobs and make it hard to find new ones, they reduce the standard of living across the country.
C.	Taming the business cycle 
1.	Modern macroeconomics largely came into being as a response to the recession of 1929–1933 that ushered the Great Depression.
2.	John Maynard Keynes suggested that policy makers should use monetary and fiscal policies to mitigate the effects of recessions, and Milton Friedman argued that it’s important to rein in booms as well as to fight slumps.
3.	Although fiscal and monetary policies haven’t been completely successful, they have helped make the economy more stable. 
III. Long-Run Economic Growth 
A.	Long-run economic growth is the sustained rise in the quantity of goods and services the economy produces. fundamental to many of the most pressing economic questions of the day. 
B.	Long-run growth per capita — a sustained upward trend in output per person — is the key to higher wages and a rising standard of living. 
C.	Long-run economic growth is a modern invention: Britain, for example, wasn’t any richer in 1650 than it was two centuries earlier. Countries don’t grow at the same rate. For example, Britain was much richer than the United States, but the United States grew faster after 1875.
D.	 Macroeconomists do not use the same models to think about long-run growth as they use to think about the business cycle. 
IV. Inflation and Deflation 
A.		A rising level of prices is inflation. A falling level of prices is deflation. 
B.	In the short run, movements in inflation are closely related to the business cycle. When the economy is depressed, inflation tends to fall; when the economy is booming, inflation tends to rise.
C.	In the long run, the overall level of prices is mainly determined by changes in the money supply. 
D.	The pain of inflation and deflation: inflation discourages people from holding onto cash, because cash loses value over time; deflation can cause the reverse problem when holding on to cash is more attractive than investing in productive assets which can deepen a recession.
E.	Price stability is the situation when the overall level of prices changes slowly. Price stability is a desirable goal, and from the 1990s to the present, it has been achieved. 
V. International Imbalances 
A.	An open economy is an economy that trades goods, services, and assets with other countries. 
B.	When a country imports more than it exports, it runs a trade deficit. Otherwise, it runs a trade surplus.
C.	A trade deficit is not necessarily bad, and a trade surplus is not necessarily good. Whether a country runs a trade surplus or a trade deficit depends on the country’s savings and investments.


Long-Run Economic Growth 
Creating Student Interest 
•	Tell students that a hundred years ago, Argentina was as rich and advanced as Canada or Germany. Today it’s a much poorer country than Canada or Germany. Ask them what went wrong in Argentina as opposed to Canada or Germany. Similarly, you can tell students that a hundred years ago, Britain was the richest and most advanced country in the world, while the United States was just one of many emerging economies. Today the United States is the economic and political leader of the world. Ask students what factors propelled the United States forward. 
•	Ask students if they think the economy usually grows at a positive rate over time. They will probably say yes. Then ask them if they think most economies grow at a positive rate each year on average. They will probably say no, and this can lead to an interesting discussion about which countries are more and less developed. 
Presenting the Material 
•	Make sure students understand the definition of long-run growth as a sustained increase in the economy’s output over time. You might discuss the recent growth experiences of countries like China, India, and Brazil in comparison with the United States and Europe. You might ask students if they think economic growth is a good thing. Generally, they should say yes because economic growth leads to an increase in per capita income and living standards. You may have some students in class who are concerned about the environment, or running out of resources, and this can also lead to some interesting discussions. 
Inflation and Deflation 
Creating Student Interest 
•	Ask students how much a can of Coke costs. Have they ever heard anyone bring up the cost of a soda starting with “Well, back in MY day, a soda cost . . .”? Present the class with the following data: Coke was first sold in cans in the 1950s for 5 cents a can. By the end of the 1950s, the same can of Coke cost 10 cents. In 1960, the average price was about 13 cents, and by 1970 about 85 cents. Have students consider and speculate as to why the same can of soda costs so much more today than in the 1950s. Ask students if they believe the things they buy are getting more expensive. Make a list of some of the items they bring up. Ask them to guess the average rate of inflation in the United States. 
•	Ask students: Since inflation causes pain, should the United States target the zero percent inflation? Point out that many factors influence inflation, and if it turns into deflation, it will also cause pain to individuals and businesses.



Do you think Qatar is an relatively open or closed economy? 

•	Ask students what products they have purchased that were produced in another country. Create a list of these items. Then ask students to name some products the United States has produced and sold to other countries. Create a list of these items. It will likely be easier for students to name imports they have purchased than exports the United States has sold. 


